- Communists: Generally one of the largest factions, they are most concerned with housing and full employment for the masses, and fair pay disparities between workers on the island. They also prefer a pro-Soviet foreign policy. Their leader is generally a farmer or other laborer.
- Capitalists: They stand in opposition to the communists and are a small, but influential faction. They are concerned with vast economic growth and higher standards of living for the upper-classes on the island. The capitalists prefer a pro-American foreign policy to realize their economic goals and are often led by a banker.
- Religious: One of (if not the) largest faction on the island. This is due to a high value that many Tropicans place on their faith. They often are concerned with access to and quality of religious institutions on the island, as well as the island's morality. Appeasing them can often result in major reductions in liberty as they are swayed by edicts such as "Book BBQ," "Prohibition," "Birth Control Ban," and "Inquisition." The religious faction tends to be led by either a priest or bishop. Having a cathedral or church on the island encourages the growth of this faction (when citizens go to church they become more religious), but not allowing any religious buildings can keep this faction's size down, though its few members will hate you.
- Intellectuals: This is one of the smallest factions on the island and tends to have the most detractors. They are most concerned with access to education on the island as well as maintaining a standard of liberty on the island. They can be one of the hardest factions to please and occasionally pose a threat to power, especially if the player is running an authoritarian regime. Their faction is often led by a professor or teacher.
- Militarists: This is a medium-sized but powerful faction mainly concerned with the size and well-being of the island's military. They are one of the biggest threats to power, as armed members of this faction may launch a coup against the player. Supporting the militarists will result in a decrease in liberty and can cause non-militarists to rebel. The militarist faction is generally led by a soldier or general.
- Environmentalists: A very small faction. They are most concerned with the natural beauty of the island. As such, they oppose logging and mining operations as well as most industry. Often they are in direct conflict with the interests of the capitalists or the communists. The leader can appease them by issuing edicts relating to the environment, such as pollution standards, but this will generally result in increased maintenance costs and decreased productivity. They can be pleased by frequent planting of trees (which can be done along the sides of roads prior to those roads being completed).